Today on The Stay At Home Chef
I'm showing you mymaster muffin recipe.
Instead of giving you dozens of recipes for different flavors of muffins,
today I'm sharing my master muffin recipe,
which you can use to make almost any flavor,
and it's super easy.
Start by preheating your oven to 425 degrees Fahrenheit.
Then linea 12 cup muffin tin with paper baking cups.
Then I like to give mine just a spritz of nonstickcooking spray,
right on those paper baking cups,
to prevent the muffins from sticking.
Nowit's time to put together our batter.
First I'm going to demonstrate a basic muffin batter,
and then I'm going to show you 5 different variations,
each demonstrating a differentway
that you can build upon the base recipe.
The batter starts with 1/2 cup of softened salted butter,
and 1 cup of granulated sugar.
We're goingto use a hand mixer to cream this together.
At first this mixture will be lumpy,
but keep onmixing for about 2 minutes.
After 2 minutes your sugar and butter will be well combined,
andit'll be a smooth, paste-like, creamy consistency.
Then you'll add in 2 large eggs,
and mix thisbriefly until just combined,
about 30 seconds.
Then I'm going to add in 1 teaspoon of vanillaextract,
or you can use other flavors of extract,
like almond extract, orange extract, lemon extract.
Those are all super popular options.
For the lemon and citrus extracts
I recommend only using 1/2 teaspoon of those,
and combining that with 1/2 teaspoon of vanilla extract.
You'll also need 2teaspoons of baking powder,
and 1/2 teaspoon of salt.
This is also the point where you'd add in anyspices
like cinnamon or pumpkin pie spice.
We're gonna give this a quick mix just to combine,
about10 seconds.
Now at this point it's time to ditch our hand mixer
and grab a rubber spatula.
Add inhalf of your all-purpose flour.
You're going to use 2 cups total,
so you're going to add in1 cup right now.
Then use the rubber spatula to stir this in.
Once all those white specks offlour start to disappear,
you'll pour in 1/2 cup of either milk or buttermilk.
Buttermilk isgoing to give you a little bit of a poofier muffin.
And you'll stir this in as well until it's wellcombined.
Last you'll add in the remaining 1 cup of all-purpose flour.
Stir this together scrapingthe sides and bottom of the bowl
to ensure that everything gets mixed in.
Now if you're gonnaadd anything into your muffins,
like dried fruit, chocolate chips, or berries,
now would be the timeto do so.
but I'll show you that in just a minute.
Your batter should be thick but also spreadable.
We're gonna divide the batter up amongst our 12 muffin cups,
and you should fill each one about2/3 of the way full.
It's always a little bit hard to tell what's 2/3 or what's 3/4,
so just try to divide your batter up as evenly as possible,
because this does make 12muffins.
You can let your muffin batter rest for about 15 minutes
before popping it in the oven,
or if you're making a larger batch it's totally okay to let it
rest in between cooking differentbatches.
Bake your muffins in the 425 degree oven for 7 minutes.
After 7 minutes reduce thetemperature on your oven to 350 degrees without opening the oven door.
Continue baking for 12-15 minutes,
and watch them carefully,
as the cooking time will vary a little bit depending on youroven.
Now let's start going over some variations,
starting with a lemon blueberry muffin.
This isgreat because it demonstrates both using
another flavor of extract as well as adding in fresh fruit.
I've already creamed together the sugar and butter
and added in the eggs,
so now I'm going to addin 1/2 teaspoon of vanilla extract,
and 1/2 teaspoon of lemon extract
before adding in mybaking powder and salt.
Continue on with the rest of the recipe
adding in the flour and buttermilk.
Once you have your batter finished
you'll add in 1 cup of fresh blueberries,
or frozen even,
youcan use those too.
Then this is optional but I like to add in the zest of 1 lemon,
so about 1 tablespoon of lemon zest.
Then simply fold this in.
Then it's just a matter of once again dividingthe batter evenly
amongst the 12 muffin cups.
One fun topping you can experiment with is sprinklingon about
1 teaspoon of granulated sugar on top of your muffins.
This gives it a nice little crunchysweet top,
and then of course bake these just as we did before.
Next up i'm going to show you how tomake a chocolate version.
For a chocolate version you'll use your butter and sugar again
just likebefore,
but this time you'll add in 1/2 cup of cocoa powder,
unsweetened cocoa powder,
and creamthat in with it.
From here you'll proceed with the rest of the
master muffin recipe by adding in eggs,
baking powder, salt, vanilla extract, all-purpose flour,
and milk or buttermilk.
The addition of thecocoa powder really doesn't do much
to change the texture of the final batter.
Then just forfun i'm going to add in
1 cup of semi-sweet chocolate chips,
and fold those in.
Even thoughyou can mix and match add-ins,
you want to total any additions that you make,
like chocolate chips,or nuts, or dried fruit,
to 1 cup total.
Next i'm going to show you one of my very favorite muffinhacks
that allows you to switch up with all sorts of different flavors
by using instant pudding.
Thistime you're only going to add in 3/4 cup of granulated sugar,
because you're goingto replace that additional 1/4 cup
with a 3.4 ounce package of instant pudding mix,
and thistime I'm using pistachio because it's one of my favorite flavors.
Cream this together and thenproceed with
the master muffin recipe as directed.
You could even fold in some chopped pistachios ifyou wanted.
This variation is fun because there's just
so many different flavors of instantpudding out there.
It makes it really easy to mix and match flavors really quickly
without having to buy a bunch of extracts.
Next I want to show just how easy it is to mix andmatch add-ins
to add a little bit of flavor to the base recipe without too much hassle.
So I'm goingto show you a cranberry white chocolate chip
with a little bit of orange zest.
This is the masterrecipe with no alterations to it.
I'm going to add in 1/2 cup of dried cranberries because,
like I said before, we're going to use 1 cup of add-ins total.
That means that the white chocolatechips
will also come in at 1/2 cup for 1 cup total.
I didn't have any orange extract today butthat's okay because,
a little bit of orange zest,
1-2 tablespoons total,
will add just ahint of orange flavor.
Once again it's simply a matter of folding this in
until the ingredientsare evenly distributed.
You can do chocolate chips, raisins, nuts,
really the possibilities are endless.
Last I want to show you how to add in spices which is super easy,
and I really don't have to show you,
but I thought it would be fun to show a cinnamon muffin
with cinnamon chips folded in,
topped witha brown sugar streusel,
and that's just delicious.
I've already creamed together the butter andsugar,
added in the eggs, baking powder, salt, and vanilla extract,
and now I'm going to add in 1teaspoon of ground cinnamon.
You can use between 1/2 teaspoon and 1 full teaspoon,
it reallyjust depends on how pronounced you want
that cinnamon flavor to be.
Finish with the rest ofthe master muffin recipe
by adding in the flour and buttermilk.
I'm going to fold in 1 cup ofcinnamon chips,
which are delicious but they can be a little harder to find
when it's not the holidays.
Go ahead and divide up the batter in your prepared muffin cups
before making your streusel topping.
A streusel is easy to make and it is a decadent addition
to lots of different flavors ofmuffins.
It starts with 1/4 cup of cold, cubed butter,
then you'll add in 1/2 cup ofbrown sugar
and 1/2 cup of all-purpose flour,
adding in 1/4 teaspoon of ground cinnamon.
Then use a pastry cutter or you can use 2 knives
cutting across each other like this.
Then youwant to cut this all together
until it resembles a coarse meal or sand.
Then you want to sprinklethis generously on top of your muffin batter.
It's almost like having littlepiles of sand on top of each muffin,
and of course the baking timeon all of these are the same.
Now you know how to make pretty much any flavorof muffin
that you want using one master recipe.
Thanks for watching.
You can find the full writtenrecipe
as well as other flavor ideas in the video description.
Be sure to subscribe, like, and follow,
and check out the rest of my videos,
where you can find hundreds of restaurant quality recipes
you can easily make at home.
we'll see you later.